.TH LEMONTAGE 1 "2026-06-30" "lemontage 0.1.3" "LeMontage Manual"
.SH NAME
lemontage \- declarative YAML pipelines for automated social video creation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lemontage
.RB [ \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.br
.B lemontage run
.RI [ \-\-var\ KEY=VALUE ]
.I pipeline.yaml
.br
.B lemontage validate
.I pipeline.yaml
.br
.B lemontage init
.RB [ \-\-force ]
.RI [ file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B LeMontage
turns a single declarative YAML file into produced media. A pipeline describes
an ordered list of steps \(em transcription, clip detection, cutting, captions,
export \(em that the engine compiles into a DAG and runs, with channel fan\-out,
matrix runs, checkpoints and per\-step failure handling.
.PP
Everything runs locally: FFmpeg for media work and
.B faster\-whisper
for speech\-to\-text. No API key or network is required once the model is cached.
(Text\-to\-speech is planned for v2.)
.PP
The authoritative description of the YAML format and every built\-in block lives
in the specification (see
.BR SEE\ ALSO ).
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B run \fIpipeline.yaml\fR
Validate, then execute the pipeline. Final media is written under the output
directory (\fB./output\fR by default); intermediates go under
\fB<output>/.lemontage/\fR. Exit status is 0 on success, 1 on a validation or
execution failure.
.TP
.B validate \fIpipeline.yaml\fR
Check the pipeline against the v1 spec without running it. Prints each error and
exits non\-zero if any are found. Dependency\-light: needs no models or FFmpeg.
.TP
.B init \fR[\fIfile\fR]
Write a starter pipeline to \fIfile\fR (default \fBpipeline.yaml\fR). Refuses to
overwrite an existing file unless \fB\-\-force\fR is given.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the program version and exit.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help for the program or a sub\-command and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-var \ KEY=VALUE
(\fBrun\fR only) Override an entry of the pipeline's \fBvars\fR block. Repeatable;
takes precedence over values declared in the file.
.TP
.B \-\-clean
(\fBrun\fR only) After a successful run, delete the temp directory
\fB<output>/.lemontage\fR (work files + checkpoint cache) and any per-clip files a
\fBconcat\fR merged, keeping only the final media.
.TP
.B \-\-force
(\fBinit\fR only) Overwrite the target file if it already exists.
.SH PIPELINE FORMAT
A pipeline is a YAML mapping with these top\-level keys:
.TP
.B lemontage
Spec version string, e.g. \fB"1.0"\fR (required).
.TP
.B name
Pipeline identifier, used for logs and output naming (required).
.TP
.B description
Free\-text human\-readable summary (optional).
.TP
.B input
Source media: \fBtype: video\fR and a \fB.mp4\fR \fBsource\fR (required; v1
supports local MP4 only).
.TP
.B steps
Ordered list of steps; each is a single\-key map \fIblock\fR: \fIparams\fR
(required).
.TP
.B vars
Reusable values, referenced with \fB{{ vars.x }}\fR (optional).
.TP
.B matrix
Fan the whole pipeline out over every combination of the listed values
(optional).
.TP
.B output
Global output settings, e.g. \fBdir: ./output\fR (optional).
.PP
Built\-in blocks: \fBstt\fR, \fBdetect_clips\fR, \fBcut\fR,
\fBcaptions\fR, \fBexport\fR, \fBconcat\fR. Common per\-step fields: \fBid\fR, \fBcache\fR,
\fBon_failure\fR (\fBabort\fR|\fBskip\fR|\fBretry\fR), \fBretries\fR,
\fBrequires\fR.
.SS Templating
Values may reference \fB{{ vars.* }}\fR, \fB{{ input.* }}\fR,
\fB{{ steps.<id>.* }}\fR and \fB{{ matrix.* }}\fR. References resolve lazily,
when a step runs.
.SS Time values
Durations and timecodes accept bare seconds (\fB90\fR), compact durations
(\fB30s\fR, \fB1m30s\fR) and timecodes (\fB00:01:30\fR).
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ./output/
Default directory for produced media (overridable via \fBoutput.dir\fR).
.TP
.B ./output/.lemontage/work/
Intermediate artifacts (cut clips, SRT files, captioned clips).
.TP
.B ./output/.lemontage/cache/
Per\-step checkpoints used to skip work whose output already exists.
.TP
.B ~/.lemontage/fonts/
Cached title fonts (the \fBexport.title_font\fR presets). Drop your own
\fB.ttf\fR here to use it by family name.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LEMONTAGE_HOME
Base directory for LeMontage's cached assets (e.g. title fonts under
\fBfonts/\fR). Defaults to \fB~/.lemontage\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Generate, validate and run a starter pipeline:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
lemontage init pipeline.yaml
lemontage validate pipeline.yaml
lemontage run pipeline.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run with a variable override:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
lemontage run pipeline.yaml \-\-var lang=en
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Validation failed, or the pipeline finished with failures.
.SH SEE ALSO
The full specification and block reference:
.IR docs/SPEC.md .
Project homepage:
.UR https://github.com/FleoThing/LeMontage
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
Florian Filloux.
